---
title: "Daily Log: 2024-03-11"
date: 2024-03-11T11:11:13-04:00
draft: true
tags: 
  - daily
slug: 2024-03-11
scrolltotop: true
---

### Preface

Another short daily log as I work to get habits built and a workflow made around writing these. I'm
beginning to think I probably should have called these something different than "Daily Logs" because
that implies it's something I intended to write every day. A better name may be Day-to-Day Logs
since I mostly want these to be posts where I can chat without the formality and completeness of the
main posts I intend to write to be more informative. I do think the name is largely semantic, the
style and content in these should convey what I want them to be. Anyways, back to your standard blog
programming.

### NixOS and the Interesting Nature of a Declarative Operating System

Over the past weekend, I succumbed to the classic Linux call of the void and started spinning a new
system to use. Normally I do not care much for tinkering with the system's initial installation and
configuration, and instead spend my time getting small behaviors and appearances working exactly how
I want. My current main system, for example, is a very bland Debian 12 installation running KDE 5
(I'm not even bothering to use Sid as a package repo). This is great for a nice stable system that I
don't want to be constantly dealing with bugs or fixing day-to-day, but this time I wanted to do
something different for fun.

While the obvious path to more complex Linux is Arch (I don't use Arch btw), a few months ago I
watched a video on the Nix package manager and later NixOS [[1]](#referenced-materials) itself and
I was intrigued. The concept of a fully declarative system was not something I had ever heard of and
in 100 years probably would have never imagined existed. For those unfamiliar, the main idea behind
NixOS is that packages and services are not configured in their own individual config files (i.e.
all the files that normally live in `/etc/`), but are instead all configured in a central
configuration file and the system is then built and configured from that. Even more interestingly
packages are installed in the exact same way. In the central config, the desired packages to be
installed are listed and during system building, the packages are fetched (or in some cases directly
built from a repository). For example, the following snippet is how grub is configured in the main
config file:

```nix
boot = {
  loader = {
    grub = {
      enable = true;
      device = "nodev";
      efiSupport = true;
      useOSProber = true;
      configurationLimit = 10;
      theme = "/boot/grub/themes/dracula";
      splashImage = "/boot/grub/themes/dracula/background.png";
      backgroundColor = "#282a36";
    };
    efi = {
      canTouchEfiVariables = true;
      efiSysMountPoint = "/boot";
    };
    timeout = -1;
  };
};
```

One of the coolest things to me about this declarative system is how easy it is to migrate it. If I
need to move to a new machine or reinstall or whatever, I can install NixOS and point it at the
configuration file(s) and it'll rebuild itself to the same state. Apparently, there might even be a
way to set it up so it can pull the configurations directly from a GitHub repo, but I haven't looked
into that yet. The only piece of a migration that isn't able to be directly copied is anything that
configures hardware (like drive mount points that would normally be in `/etc/fstab`) but this is
handled by having those in a separate configuration file that is imported. This way the
system-specific configurations can be generated during install and imported transparently.

I intend to do a comprehensive main blog post about NixOS and my experiences with it (add it to the
list of posts I will eventually get to), but for now, I have successfully been able to install the
OS, get it consistently booting and starting services correctly, and have a basic hyprland WM
environment set up. More importantly than what is currently set up, I also managed to do it without
wiping my standard Debian install or wrecking my EFI partition. Both of which are things I have done
while attempting to dual boot in the past (sometimes my fault, sometimes Windows fault).

### Referenced Materials

[1] <https://nixos.org/>
