---
title: "Daily Log: 2024-03-05"
date: 2024-03-05T12:42:10-05:00
draft: false
tags: 
  - daily
slug: 2024-03-05
scrolltotop: true
---

### Preface

As this is the first daily post, I would expect it to be a bit without style and likely very rambly.
In time I will come to refine my style for these logs and will likely being to include extra pieces
such as images and diagrams to better convey my thoughts, but in the meanwhile I must simply just
get started to ensure that I actually write these. I hope to put out at least a few of these a week,
but depending on what I'm working on and what I have time for on the side, there might not always be
interesting stuff to write about.

## Virtual and Real Radio Research

In the quest to create a system that can integrate an SDR with an EMANE emulation environment, I
began seeking out existing literature on the concept of shared virtual/physical communication
modeling. I found two papers of merit from a group of researchers, but other than that generally
not much. It's likely that I'll need to expand my view to work done on shared software and hardware
testbeds for all use-cases, not just communication systems (robotic systems will likely provide to be
the best area of practice for this).

As for the two papers I found, [[1]](#referenced-materials) and [[2]](#referenced-materials), the
primary method for interfacing the SDRs used is through an A/D and D/A conversion step. This is a
process that has come up before in preliminary discussion meetings about this project, but is
heavily DSP focused (not my area of expertise) and wouldn't mesh well with EMANE (our emulation
software of choice, look forward to a more in-depth post about EMANE at some point).

EMANE fundamentally does not operate on actual signals in its emulation process chain. The data
being passed "over-the-air" in EMANE is the original network packet inserted into EMANE, wrapped in
a significant amount of metadata that will be used by the receiver to impart channel effects. As an
extremely basic example, if a channel between two nodes is to impart 50ms of delay, the transmitting
EMANE node will add the time the packet was "transmitted" as a header. The receiving node will then
receive the packet with metadata and use that timestamp to hold the packet until 50ms has passed and
will then pass the packet on. (This has the implication that the OTA channel can not take longer
to deliver a packet than the delay of the modeled channel, but that's a later problem I choose to
not think about for now.)

In order for our SDRs to interface with EMANE, the radio will need to receive an RF signal from the
EMANE node and the EMANE node will need to receive a packet with appropriate metadata. My first
guess is we will need to introduce a surrogate radio node that can translate between these two
instances. The surrogate and receive and transmit RF signals to the hardware radio and can create
or interpret EMANE header data as necessary. The big flaw that sticks out to me here is that this
surrogate and translation layer exist as a part of the "OTA" channel which means any processing time
spent here affects the actual communication network. If every packet takes 1 second to translate,
then the networks minimum latency is one second (this sounds a lot like the problem I said I wanted
to ignore for now.)

As this research progresses, I plan to continue to provide updates on what I can, but I simply have
to avoid giving away how the sausage is made before any publications that come out of this are
released. Who knows, maybe I discover the newest hit way to emulate a network.

### Referenced Materials

[1] F. Kojima, T. Miyachi, T. Matsumura, H. Sawada, H. Harai and H. Harada, "A Large-Scale Wireless
Emulation Environment with Interaction between Physical and Virtual Radio Nodes for Beyond 5G
Systems," *2022 IEEE 33rd Annual International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio*
*Communications (PIMRC)*, Kyoto, Japan, 2022, pp. 1-6, doi: 10.1109/PIMRC54779.2022.9977562.

[2] T. Matsumura and H. Sawada, "Investigation of Beyond 5G-based Physical Radio Node Emulation for
Large-scale Wireless Emulator," *2022 25th International Symposium on Wireless Personal Multimedia*
*Communications (WPMC)*, Herning, Denmark, 2022, pp. 400-405, doi: 10.1109/WPMC55625.2022.10014875.
